=head1 NAME

muttprint - pretty printing of mails with Mutt


=head1 SYNOPSIS

muttprint [I<options>]... [-f I<file>]


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manual page documents briefly the B<Muttprint> utility. This manual 
page was written orginally written for the Debian GNU/Linux distribution 
because the original program did not have a manual page, but now I took
over this manpage in POD-format.

B<Muttprint> is a utility that formats the printing of Mutt and other 
mail clients like XFMail or PINE to be like the printing of Netscape Messenger 
or Kmail. It can print a little penguin on the first page and a headline on every
page. Furthermore, it only prints the most important headers, but not the 
whole plethora of them.

For detailed informations about Muttprint look read the User's guide in PDF 
and HTML format at F<##DOCDIR##/muttprint/>.

Anyway, you have to put the following line in your F<##SYSCONFDIR##/Muttrc> or 
F<~/.muttrc>:

	set print_command="muttprint"

If you want to customize the settings of B<Muttprint>, just copy
F<##DOCDIR##/muttprint/sample-muttprintrc-en>
to F<##SYSCONFDIR##/Muttprintrc> or F<~/.muttprintrc> in reliance
if you want change the settings for the whole system or one user.

B<Muttprint> defaults to English lanuage settings if the environment 
variable I<LANG> is not set.  For example in a German environment 
you should set:

	export LANG=de_DE

This can for instance be done in in your local F<~/.bashrc>.

If B<Muttprint> should not print with the message 
C<lpr: unable to print file: ...>, you should try to use
another printer than I<lp>, e. g. I<lp5> or I<tp0> (if you
use TurboPrint).

B<CUPS USERS NOTE:> The setting C<PRINTER="lp"> will not
work, and you have to set the Cups printer name instead
(e. g. I<LaserJet>), which you can easily check by typing I<lpq>
on the commandline.

aufgebrochen
=head1 OPTIONS

B<PLEASE NOTICE:> This options override the corresponding
settings in F<~/.muttprintrc> and F<##SYSCONFDIR##/Muttprintrc>.

And here's the description of all command line options
(a descriptions of the settings in the rcfile is included in
the F<sample-muttprintrc-en> distributed with B<Muttprint>):

=over 7

=item B<-h, --help>

Prints a list of all possible options.


=item B<-v, --version>

Prints the current version of B<Muttprint>.


=item B<-f> I<file>B<, --file> I<file>

Reads from file instad of STDIN. Useful for some mail clients as I<XFMail>.
If I<file> is I<->, B<Muttprint> reads from STDIN.


=item B<-p> I<printername>B<, --printer> I<printername>

Uses another printer than the default I<lp> or the setting in the rcfile.
You can also B<print in file> using F<TO_FILE:/path/to/file> as printer 
name. If you would like to have the result in B<STDOUT>, set
the printer name to I<->.


=item B<-i> I<file>B<, --penguin> I<file>

Takes F<file> as picture printed on the right top of the sheet. F<file>
must contain the full path. Set F<file> to I<off> if you wouldn't 
like to print a picture.


=item B<-x, --x-face> | B<-nox, --nox-face>

Turns on or off the printing of the picture which was transmitted in the
I<X-Face:> header. Read the documentation for a detailed explanation.


=item B<-t> I<number>B<, --speed> I<number>

This is the amount of time in seconds which your printer needs to
print one page. It is only necessary if you use duplex printing.
Default is 30 (seconds).


=item B<-w> I<number>B<, --wait> I<number>

Amount of time in seconds which B<Muttprint> should wait between
printing odd and even pages for duplex printing.


=item B<-F> I<fontname>B<, --font> I<fontname>

Here you can choose a nice font family for your printing. Possible are:
I<Latex>, I<Latex-bright>, I<Times>, I<Utopia>, I<Palatino>, I<Charter> and
I<Bookman>. If all fonts are available on your system depends of
your installed LaTeX-system. Default is I<Latex>.


=item B<-H, --headrule> | B<-noH, --noheadrule>

Here you can choose whether it should be printed a rule after
the topline on pages greater than 2 or not.


=item B<-b, --footrule> | B<-nob, --nofootrule>

Here you can choose whether it should be printed a rule over the
footline or not.


=item B<-S> I<style>B<, --frontstyle> I<style>

Choose a style for the printing of the mailheaders on the first page:
I<plain>, I<border> (default), I<fbox>, I<shadowbox>, I<ovalbox>, I<Ovalbox>,
I<doublebox>, I<grey>, I<greybox>. Read the manual for a detailed description
of this values.

=item B<-a> I<headers>B<, --printed-headers> I<headers>

Specify the headers that should be printed. Separate each header with
C<_>. Headers that are embedded in I<*> are printed bold; use
I</> for italic printing. If a header does not exist, it will be omitted.
The given order is the same as on the printing.

Two examples:

	Date_To_From_CC_Newsgroups_*Subject*   (default)
	/Date/_To_From_X-Mailer_*/Subject/*



=item B<-P> I<paperformat>B<, --paper> I<paperformat>

Choose your paper format: I<A4> in most countries ("DIN A4" in Germany)
and I<letter> in the U.S.


=item B<-l> I<language>B<, --lang> I<language>

Give the short form of your language. Currently are supported: 
I<de> (German), I<en> (English), I<it> (Italian), I<fr> (French),
I<es> (Spanish) and I<cs> (Czech).
Default is the I<LANG> environment, fallback is English.


=item B<-c> I<charset>B<, --charset> I<charset>

This option sets the input charset:

	charset		Muttprint option
	--------------------------------
	ISO-8859-1	latin1
	ISO-8859-2	latin2
	ISO-8859-3	latin3
	ISO-8859-4	latin4
	ISO-8859-9	latin5
	ISO-8859-15	latin9
	Windows-1252	latin1
	Windows-1250	latin2
			auto
	---------------------------------

The I<auto> setting tries to find a mailheader that contains
the charset of the mail. This works only under specific
circumstances, so use this carefully.


=item B<-e> I<String>B<, --date> I<String>

This option accepts two settings: I<original> and I<local>. If you
use I<original>, the date will be printed unchanged as it appears
in the mailheader, i. e. in English and in the sender's time zone.
If set to I<local>, the date will be printed in the local
language and in the system's time zone. See the options
I<--date-format> and I<--lang>.

Examples:

        original: Tue, 15 Jan 2002 21:43:49 +0100
        local:    Dienstag, 15. Januar 2002 21:43:49 
		          (German locale)



=item B<-E> I<String>B<, --date-format> I<String>

This options allows you to change the date format (if you've
choosen I<local> before). The argument is a format string
according to strftime(3), e. g.:

        "%A, %d. %B %Y %H:%M:%S" (standard in Germany)
        "%a, %d.%m.%y %H:%M"     (shorten form)
        "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S"      (ISO format)



=item B<-A> I<String>B<, --addressformat> I<String>

With this option you can set how mail adresses are printed. The value
I<original> does not change the header. Otherwise you have to specify
a format string; following substitutions are done:

	%r		name ("real name")
	%a		mail address
	\n		newline

The default setting is I<%r E<lt>%aE<gt>,\n>. Moreover, you can emphasize
some parts with bold or italic printing. You have to enclose these parts
with stars (C<*>) for bold or with slashes (C</>) for italics.

Example:

	"/%r/ (%a),"

The quotes are necessary because the string contains spaces. Otherwise the shell
splits the string into two parts.


=item B<-n> I<String>B<, --verbatimnormal> I<String>

This sets the options which are passed to the I<Verbatim> environment
that is necessary to print the normal mail text. Detailled explanations
are in the user's guide. Some examples:


	fontshape=it           italic fonts
	frame=topline          border above the block
	fontfamily=helvetica   Helvetica font
	fontsize=\Huge         huge font

To combine options, you have to separate each option with a comma, e. g.
I<fontshape=it,fontseries=b>.


=item B<-V> I<String>B<, --verbatimsig> I<String>

Same as B<--verbatimnormal>, but this sets how the signature
is printed. If the argument is I<raw>, there is now discrimination
between normal text and signature.


=item B<-D, --debug> | B<-noD, --nodebug>

Choose whether B<Muttprint> writes to a logfile F<##TEMPDIR##/muttprint.log>.
Useful to ask some other about help if B<Muttprint> doesn't work.


=item B<-d, --duplex> | B<-nod, --noduplex>

Enables or disables duplex printing. If enabled, B<Muttprint>
prints only odd pages and waits some time before it prints
even pages.


=item B<-2> | B<-1>

Prints two pages on one sheet as shown here:

	+----------+----------+
	|          |          |
	|          |          |
	|    1     |     2    |
	|          |          |
	|          |          |
	|          |          |	
	+----------+----------+
	
This feature is called I<papersave mode> in the manual and in
the rcfile.

=item B<-g> I<number>B<, --topmargin> I<number>

Sets the top margin in millimeters.


=item B<-G> I<number>B<, --bottommargin> I<number>

Sets the bottom margin in millimeters.


=item B<-j> I<number>B<, --leftmargin> I<number>

Sets the left margin in millimeters.

=item B<-J> I<number>B<, --rightmargin> I<number>

Sets the right margin in millimeters.


=item B<-s, --rem_sig> | B<-nos, --norem_sig>

Removes the signature (separated by C<-- >) in the 
printing. This is useful for very long signatures. But more and more people 
(or mail clients) doesn't separate the signature correctly so this
feature works not always.


=item B<-q, --rem_quote> | B<-noq, --norem_quote>

Remove the quoted paragraph from the printing. 

B<Muttprint> detects the quoting with the same regular expression as Mutt, 
so it should work.

=item B<-z> I<size>B<, --fontsize> I<size>

Specifies the font size. Possible values are I<10pt>, I<11pt>
and I<12pt>.


=item B<-W> I<number>B<, --wrapmargin> I<number>

Controls how long the longest line could be. Longer lines
are wraped automatically and the paragraph will be reformated.


=item B<-r> I<file>B<, --rcfile> I<file>

Specifies another configuration file, which is read additionally to F<##SYSCONFDIR##/Muttprintrc>
and F<~/.muttprintrc>. This file overwrites all other settings, including this one
which are done by command line parameters. (It makes no sense to include other
options despite I<-f> if you use this option.)


=back



=head1 FILES

=over 7

=item F<##SYSCONFDIR##/Muttprintrc>

System-wide configuration file.


=item F<~/.muttprintrc>

User configuration file.


=item F<##TEMPDIR##/muttprint-XXXXX>

Temporary files created by B<Muttprint>.


=item F<##DOCDIR##/muttprint/>

B<Muttprint> manual files in different languages and formats.


=item F<##SHAREDIR##/muttprint/>

Some pictures which can be used for printing on the
first page of your mail.

=item F<##LIBDIR##/muttprint>

Translation files.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

mutt(1)

Homepage: I<http://muttprint.sourceforge.net>



=head1 COPYRIGHT

(c) 2000-2001 Bernhard Walle


This is free software; see the source for  copying  conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 


=head1 AUTHOR

Bernhard Walle E<lt>Bernhard.Walle@gmx.deE<gt>

=cut

