=head1 NAME

muttprint - pretty printing of mails with Mutt


=head1 SYNOPSIS

muttprint [I<options>]... [-f I<file>]


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manual page documents briefly the B<Muttprint> utility. This manual 
page was written orginally written for the Debian GNU/Linux distribution 
because the original program did not have a manual page, but now I took
over this manpage in POD-format.

B<NOTE:> The path F</usr/share/doc/packages/muttprint> could be
F</usr/doc/packages/muttprint> or F</usr/share/doc/muttprint> on
your system!

B<Muttprint> is a utility that formats the printing of Mutt and other 
mail clients like XFMail or PINE to be like the printing of Netscape Messenger 
or Kmail. It can print a little penguin on the first page and a headline on every
page. Furthermore, it only prints the most important headers, but not the 
whole plethora of them.

For detailed informations about Muttprint look read the User's guide in PDF 
and HTML format at F</usr/share/muttprint>.

Anyway, you have to put the following line in your F</etc/Muttrc> or 
F<~/.muttrc>:

	set print_command="muttprint"

If you want to customize the settings of B<Muttprint>, just copy
F</usr/share/doc/packages/muttprint/sample-muttprintrc>
to F</etc/Muttprintrc> or F<~/.muttprintrc> in reliance
if you want change the settings for the whole system or one user.

B<Muttprint> defaults to English lanuage settings if the environment 
variable I<LANG> is not set.  For example in a German environment 
you should set:

	export LANG=de_DE

This can for instance be done in in your local F<~/.bashrc>.

If B<Muttprint> should not print with the message 
C<lpr: unable to print file: ...>, you should try to use
another printer than I<lp>, e. g. I<lp5> or I<tp0> (if you
use TurboPrint).

B<CUPS USERS NOTE:> The setting C<PRINTER="lp"> will not
work, and you have to set the Cups printer name instead
(e. g. I<LaserJet>), which you can easily check by typing I<lpq>
on the commandline.


=head1 OPTIONS

B<PLEASE NOTICE:> This options override the corresponding
settings in F<~/.muttprintrc> and F</etc/Muttprintrc>.

And here's the description of all command line options
(a descriptions of the settings in the rcfile is included in
the F<sample-muttprintrc> distributed with B<Muttprint>):

=over 7

=item B<-h, --help>

Prints a list of all possible options.


=item B<-v, --version>

Prints the current version of B<Muttprint>.


=item B<-f> I<file>B<, --file> I<file>

Reads from file instad of STDIN. Useful for some mail clients as I<XFMail>.
If I<file> is I<->, B<Muttprint> reads from STDIN.


=item B<-p> I<printername>B<, --printer> I<printername>

Uses another printer than the default I<lp> or the setting in the rcfile.
You can also B<print in file> using F<TO_FILE:/path/to/file> as printer 
name. If you would like to have the result in B<STDOUT>, set
the printer name to I<->.


=item B<-i> I<file>B<, --penguin> I<file>

Takes F<file> as picture printed on the right top of the sheet. F<file>
must contain the full path. Set F<file> to I<off> if you wouldn't 
like to print a picture.


=item B<-x, --x-face> | B<-nox, --nox-face>

Turns on or off the printing of the picture which was transmitted in the
I<X-Face:> header. Read the documentation for a detailed explanation.


=item B<-t> I<number>B<, --speed> I<number>

This is the amount of time in seconds which your printer needs to
print one page. It is only necessary if you use duplex printing.
Default is 30 (seconds).


=item B<-w> I<number>B<, --wait> I<number>

Amount of time in seconds which B<Muttprint> should wait between
printing odd and even pages for duplex printing.


=item B<-F> I<fontname>B<, --font> I<fontname>

Here you can choose a nice font family for your printing. Possible are:
I<Latex>, I<Latex-bright>, I<Times>, I<Utopia>, I<Palatino>, I<Charter> and
I<Bookman>. If all fonts are available on your system depends of
your installed LaTeX-system. Default is I<Latex-bright>.


=item B<-H, --headrule> | B<-noH, --noheadrule>

Here you can choose whether it should be printed a rule after
the topline on pages greater than 2 or not.


=item B<-b, --footrule> | B<-nob, --nofootrule>

Here you can choose whether it should be printed a rule over the
footline or not.


=item B<-S> I<style>B<, --frontstyle> I<style>

Choose a style for the printing of the mailheaders on the first page:
I<plain>, I<border> (default), I<fbox>, I<shadowbox>, I<ovalbox>, I<Ovalbox>,
I<doublebox>, I<grey>, I<greybox>. Read the manual for a detailed description
of this values.

=item B<-a> I<headers>B<, --printed-headers> I<headers>

Specify the headers that should be printed. Separate each header with
C<_>. Headers that are embedded in I<*> are printed bold; use
I</> for italic printing. If a header does not exist, it will be omitted.
The given order is the same as on the printing.

Two examples:

	Date_To_From_CC_Newsgroups_*Subject*   (default)
	/Date/_To_From_X-Mailer_*/Subject/*



=item B<-P> I<paperformat>B<, --paper> I<paperformat>

Choose your paper format: I<A4> in most countries ("DIN A4" in Germany)
and I<letter> in the U.S.


=item B<-l> I<language>B<, --lang> I<language>

Give the short form of your language. Currently are supported: 
I<de> (German), I<en> (English), I<it> (Italian), I<fr> (French),
I<es> (Spanish) and I<cs> (Czech).
Default is the I<LANG> environment, fallback is English.



=item B<-D, --debug> | B<-noD, --nodebug>

Choose whether B<Muttprint> writes to a logfile F</tmp/muttprint.log>.
Useful to ask some other about help if B<Muttprint> doesn't work.


=item B<-d, --duplex> | B<-nod, --noduplex>

Enables or disables duplex printing. If enabled, B<Muttprint>
prints only odd pages and waits some time before it prints
even pages.


=item B<-2> | B<-1>

Prints two pages on one sheet as shown here:

	+----------+----------+
	|          |          |
	|          |          |
	|    1     |     2    |
	|          |          |
	|          |          |
	|          |          |	
	+----------+----------+
	
This feature is called I<papersave mode> in the manual and in
the rcfile.


=item B<-s, --rem_sig> | B<-nos, --norem_sig>

Removes the signature (separated by C<-- >) in the 
printing. This is useful for very long signatures. But more and more people 
(or mail clients) doesn't separate the signature correctly so this
feature works not always.


=item B<-q, --rem_quote> | B<-noq, --norem_quote>

Remove the quoted paragraph from the printing. 

B<Muttprint> detects the quoting with the same regular expression as Mutt, 
so it should work.

=back



=head1 FILES

=over 7

=item F</etc/Muttprintrc>

System-wide configuration file.


=item F<~/.muttprintrc>

User configuration file.


=item F</tmp/muttprint-XXXXX>

Temporary files created by B<Muttprint>.


=item F</usr/share/doc/packages/muttprint/>

B<Muttprint> manual files in different languages and formats.


=item F</usr/share/muttprint/>

Some pictures which can be used for printing on the
first page of your mail.

=item F</usr/lib/muttprint>

Translation files.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

mutt(1)

Homepage: I<http://muttprint.sourceforge.net>



=head1 COPYRIGHT

(c) 2000-2001 Bernhard Walle


This is free software; see the source for  copying  conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 


=head1 AUTHOR

Bernhard Walle E<lt>Bernhard.Walle@gmx.deE<gt>

=cut

